THE STORY OF FARQUHAR SHAW.

This soldier, whose name, from the circumstances connected with his
remarkable story, daring courage, and terrible fate, is still
remembered in the regiment, in the early history of which he bears so
prominent a part, was one of the first who enlisted in Captain
Campbell of Finab's independent band of the _Reicudan Dhu_, or Black
Watch, when the six separate companies composing this Highland force
were established along the Highland Border in 1729, to repress the
predatory spirit of certain tribes, and to prevent the levy of black
mail.  The companies were independent, and at that time wore the clan
tartan of their captains, who were Simon Frazer, the celebrated Lord
Lovat; Sir Duncan Campbell of Lochnell; Grant of Ballindalloch;
Alister Campbell of Finab, whose father fought at Darien; Ian
Campbell of Carrick, and Deors Monro of Culcairn.

The privates of these companies were all men of a superior station,
being mostly cadets of good families--gentlemen of the old Celtic and
patriarchal lines; and of baronial proprietors.  In the Highlands,
the only genuine mark of aristocracy was descent from the founder of
the tribe; all who claimed this were styled _uislain_, or gentlemen,
and, as such, when off duty, were deemed the equal of the highest
chief in the land.  Great care was taken by the six captains to
secure men of undoubted courage, of good stature, stately deportment,
and handsome figure.  Thus, in all the old Highland regiments, but
more especially the _Reicudan Dhu_, equality of blood and similarity
of descent, secured familiarity and regard between the officers and
their men--for the latter deemed themselves inferior to no man who
breathed the air of heaven.  Hence, according to an English engineer
officer, who frequently saw these independent companies, "many of
those private gentlemen-soldiers have gillies or servants to attend
upon them in their quarters, and upon a march, to carry their
provisions, baggage, and firelocks."

Such was the composition of the corps, now first embodied among that
remarkable people, the Scottish Highlanders--"a people," says the
Historian of Great Britain, "untouched by the Roman or Saxon
invasions on the south, and by those of the Danes on the east and
west skirts of their country--the _unmixed remains_ of that vast
Celtic empire, which once stretched from the Pillars of Hercules to
Archangel."

The Reicudan Dhu were armed with the usual weapons and accoutrements
of the line; but, in addition to these, had the arms of their native
country--the broadsword, target, pistol, and long dagger, while the
sergeants carried the old Celtic _tuagh_, or Lochaber axe.  It was
distinctly understood by all who enlisted in this new force, that
their military duties were to be confined _within_ the Highland
Border, where, from the wild, predatory spirit of those clans which
dwelt next the Lowlands, it was known that they would find more than
enough of military service of the most harassing kind.  In the
conflicts which daily ensued among the mountains--in the sudden
marches by night; the desperate brawls among Caterans, who were armed
to the teeth, fierce as nature and outlawry could make them, and who
dwelt in wild and pathless fastnesses secluded amid rocks, woods, and
morasses, there were few who in courage, energy, daring, and activity
equalled Farquhar Shaw, a gentleman from the Braes of Lochaber, who
was esteemed the _premier_ private in the company of Campbell of
Finab, which was then quartered in that district; for each company
had its permanent cantonment and scene of operations during the
eleven years which succeeded the first formation of the Reicudan Dhu.

Farquhar was a perfect swordsman, and deadly shot alike with the
musket and pistol; and his strength was such, that he had been known
to twist a horse-shoe, and drive his _skene dhu_ to the hilt in a
pine log; while his activity and power of enduring hunger, thirst,
heat, cold and fatigue, became a proverb among the companies of the
Watch: for thus had he been reared and trained by his father, a
genuine old Celtic gentleman and warrior, whose memory went back to
the days when Dundee led the valiant and true to the field of
Rinrory, and in whose arms the viscount fell from his horse in the
moment of victory, and was borne to the house of Urrard to die.  He
was a true Highlander of the old school; for an old school has
existed in all ages and everywhere, even among the Arabs, the
children of Ishmael, in the desert; for they, too, have an olden time
to which they look back with regret, as being nobler, better, braver,
and purer than the present.  Thus, the father of Farquhar Shaw was a
grim _duinewissal_, who never broke bread or saw the sun rise without
uncovering his head and invoking the names of "God, the Blessed Mary,
and St. Colme of the Isle;" who never sat down to a meal without
opening wide his gates, that the poor and needy might enter freely;
who never refused the use of his purse and sword to a friend or
kinsman, and was never seen unarmed, even in his own dining-room; who
never wronged any man; but who never suffered a wrong or affront to
pass, without sharp and speedy vengeance; and who, rather than
acknowledge the supremacy of the House of Hanover, died sword in hand
at the rising in Glensheil.  For this act, his estates were seized by
the House of Breadalbane, and his only son, Farquhar, became a
private soldier in the ranks of the Black Watch.

It may easily be supposed, that the son of such a father was imbued
with all his cavalier spirit, his loyalty and enthusiasm, and that
his mind was filled by all the military, legendary, and romantic
memories of his native mountains, the land of the Celts, which, as a
fine Irish ballad says, was THEIRS

  Ere the Roman or the Saxon, the Norman or the Dane,
  Had first set foot in Britain, or trampled heaps of slain,
  Whose manhood saw the Druid rite, at forest tree and rock--
  And savage tribes of Britain round the shrines of Zernebok;
  Which for generations witnessed all the glories of the Gael,
  Since their Celtic sires sang war-songs round the sacred fires of Baal.


When it was resolved by Government to form the six independent
Highland companies into one regiment, Farquhar Shaw was left on the
sick list at the cottage of a widow, named Mhona Cameron, near
Inverlochy, having been wounded in a skirmish with Caterans in
Glennevis, and he writhed on his sickbed when his comrades, under
Finab, marched for the Birks of Aberfeldy, the muster-place of the
whole, where the companies were to be united into one battalion,
under the celebrated John Earl of Crawford and Lindesay, the last of
his ancient race, a hero covered with wounds and honours won in the
services of Britain and Russia.

Weak, wan, and wasted though he was (for his wound, a slash from a
pole-axe, had been a severe one), Farquhar almost sprang from bed
when he heard the notes of their retiring pipes dying away, as they
marched through Maryburgh, and round by the margin of Lochiel.  His
spirit of honour was ruffled, moreover, by a rumour, spread by his
enemies the Caterans, against whom he had fought repeatedly, that he
was growing faint-hearted at the prospect of the service of the Black
Watch being extended beyond the Highland Border.  As rumours to this
effect were already finding credence in the glens, the fierce, proud
heart of Farquhar burned within him with indignation and unmerited
shame.

At last, one night, an old crone, who came stealthily to the cottage
in which he was residing, informed him that, by the same outlaws who
were seeking to deprive him of his honour, a subtle plan had been
laid to surround his temporary dwelling, and put him to death, in
revenge for certain wounds inflicted by his sword upon their comrades.

The energy and activity of the Black Watch had long since driven the
Caterans to despair, and nothing but the anticipation of killing
Farqnhar comfortably, and chopping him into ounce pieces at leisure,
enabled them to survive their troubles with anything like Christian
fortitude and resignation.

"And this is their plan, mother?" said Farquhar to the crone.

"To burn the cottage, and you with it."

"Dioul! say you so, Mother Mhona," he exclaimed; "then 'tis time I
were betaking me to the hills.  Better have a cool bed for a few
nights on the sweet-scented heather, than be roasted in a burning
cottage, like a fox in its hole."

In vain the cotters besought him to seek concealment elsewhere; or to
tarry until he had gained his fall strength.

"Were I in the prime of strength, I would stay here," said Farquhar;
"and when sleeping on my sword and target, would fear nothing.  If
these dogs of Caterans came, they should be welcome to my life, if I
could not redeem it by the three best lives in their band; but I am
weak as a growing boy, and so shall be off to the free mountain side,
and seek the path that leads to the Birks of Aberfeldy."

"But the Birks are far from here, Farquhar," urged old Mhona.

"_Attempt_, and _Did-not_, were the worst of Fingal's hounds,"
replied the soldier.  "Farquhar will owe you a day in harvest for all
your kindness; but his comrades wait, and go he must!  Would it not
be a strange thing and a shameful, too, if all the Reicudan Dhu
should march down into the flat, bare land of the Lowland clowns, and
Farquhar not be with them?  What would Finab, his captain, think? and
what would all in Brae Lochaber say?"

"Yet pause," continued the crones.

"Pause!  Dhia! my father's bones will soon be clattering in their
grave, far away in green Glensheil, where he died for King James,
Mhona."

"Beware," continued the old woman, "lest you go for ever, Farquhar."

"It is longer to _for ever_ than to Beltane, and by that day I must
be at the Birks of Aberfeldy."

Then, seeing that he was determined, the crones muttered among
themselves that the _tarvecoill_ would fall upon him; but Farquhar
Shaw, though far from being free of his native superstitions, laughed
aloud; for the tarvecoill is a black cloud, which, if seen on a
new-year's eve, is said to portend stormy weather; hence it is a
proverb for a misfortune about to happen.

"You were unwise to become a soldier, Farquhar," was their last
argument.

"Why?"

"The tongue may tie a knot which the teeth cannot untie."

"As your husbands' tongues did, when they married you all, poor men!"
was the good-natured retort of Farquhar.  "But fear not for me; ere
the snow begins to melt on Ben Nevis, and the sweet wallflower to
bloom on the black Castle of Inverlochy, I will be with you all
again," he added, while belting his tartan-plaid about him, slinging
his target on his shoulder, and whistling upon Bran, his favourite
stag-hound; he then set out to join the regiment, by the nearest
route, on the skirts of Ben Nevis, resolving to pass the head of
Lochlevin, through Larochmohr, and the deep glens that lead towards
the Braes of Rannoch, a long, desolate, and perilous journey, but
with his sword, his pistols, and gigantic hound to guard him, his
plaid for a covering, and the purple heather for a bed wherever he
halted, Farquhar feared nothing.

His faithful dog Bran, which had shared his couch and plaid since the
time when it was a puppy, was a noble specimen of the Scottish hound,
which was used of old in the chase of the white bull, the wolf, and
the deer, and which is in reality the progenitor of the common
greyhound; for the breed has degenerated in warmer climates than the
stern north.  Bran (so named from Bran 