CHAPTER I.

COLIN AND OINA.

The sun of a September evening--we need not say in what year--was
shining down a wild and lonely glen, a few miles eastward from the
head of Loch Lomond, where a boy and a girl sat on the slope of the
green hill-side, watching a herd of fifteen red-eyed, small, and
shaggy black cattle, with curly fronts and long sharp horns, that
were browsing mid-leg deep amid the long-leaved fern.  The place was
one of stern and solemn grandeur.

Leaping from ledge to ledge, and foaming between the grey and
time-worn rocks, a mountain torrent, red and fierce, swept down the
steep slope of the narrow glen, now disappearing in deep corries,
that were covered by dwarf birch, hazel, and alder trees, and
elsewhere emerging in mist and spray, white as the thistle's beard,
till it reached the lake which reposed under the shadows of the vast
Ben Lomond, whose summits were hidden in grey mist.

Ben Lawers, which towers above the source of the Tay, and Ben More,
that looks down on the Dochart with its floating isle, are there; but
the king of these is Ben Lomond, a name which means in English "the
hill of the lake full of isles," for four-and-twenty stud the loch
below; and the bare scalp of that mighty mountain rises to the height
of 3,300 feet above the water.  There the wild winds that came in
sudden gusts down the glens, furrowed up the bosom of the loch,
causing its waters to ripple on the silent shore, and on its verdant
isles, with a weird and solemn sound.

But here where our story opens, the shrill note of the curlew, as he
suddenly sprang aloft from the thick soft heather, made one start;
while the rush of the many white watercourses that poured over the
whinstone rocks, and woke the silence, was sharp and hissing.  The
setting sun shed a flood of purple light along the steep-sided glen,
making the heather seem absolutely crimson.

The boy and girl, Colin Bane, the son of a widow, and Oina
MacAleister, belonged to the clachan, or village--the smoking
chimneys of which alone indicated its locality--about three miles
off; for the walls of the little cottages so closely resembled the
grey rocks of the glen, and their roofs, thatched with heather,
blended so nearly with the mountainside, that, except for the forty
little columns of white vapour that ascended into the clear evening
sky, there was nothing else to indicate a human habitation.

Neither of these young people was above twelve years old; but the boy
was tall, lithe, and manly for his age.  His dark grey eyes were keen
and sharp as those of the wiry otter terrier that sat beside him; and
his bare legs, which his tattered kilt revealed from the knee, showed
that he was handsome as well as strong--so strong, that he was
already entitled to wear a man's bonnet, as a proof that he could
lift and fling the "stone of strength,"--the test of manhood, which
lay beside the door of Rob Roy's house, as beside that of every
Highland chieftain, to test the muscle of his growing followers; for
previous to being able to poise and hurl the _Clachneart_, a boy wore
his hair simply tied with a thong.

A jacket of deerskin, fastened by wooden buttons and loops of thong;
a pouch or sporan composed of a polecat's skin, with its face for a
flap; and a skene dhu (or black knife) stuck in a waist-belt,
completed the attire of Colin.

His pretty companion, who sat with her little bare feet paddling in a
pool of water that gurgled from a rock, was enveloped in a short
plaid of red tartan, fastened under her chin by a little silver
brooch, and her thick brown hair, which she had wreathed with blue
bells and golden broom, fell in masses on her shoulders.

But the faces of this boy and girl were thoughtful, keen, and anxious
in expression; for they were children of a long-oppressed, outlawed,
and broken tribe, the MacGregors, or Clan Alpine.  Still, as they
tended the cattle, they sang merrily; for when reaping in the fields,
or rowing on the lochs, casting the shuttle at the loom, or marching
in the ranks to battle, in those days the Scottish Highlander always
sang.

Ever and anon the boy and girl would pause and utter a joyous shout,
when a large brown salmon leaped amid a shower of diamonds from the
rough stream that tore through the glen; or when a sharp-nosed fox, a
shaggy otter, or a red polecat came stealthily out of the gorse and
whins to drink of it; for as yet they had no other visitors, and saw
not those who were secretly approaching.

Colin, who had started up to cast a stone at a wild swan, and pursue
it a little way, returned breathless; but nevertheless, producing a
chanter of hard black wood, mounted with ivory rings, from his
girdle, in which it had been stuck, he said,--"Come, Oina--Mianna
Bhaird a thuair aois--sing, and I shall play."

"It is a song of many verses, and is too long," replied the girl.

"Long!  There are only two-and-thirty verses, and mother says that
old Paul Crubach can remember as many more."

Colin commenced the air at once upon his chanter, and without further
hesitation the girl began one of the old songs which are half sung
and half recited, in a manner peculiar to the Highlands.

I have no intention of afflicting my readers with all the said song
in Gaelic; but it ran somewhat in this fashion (a friend has
translated it for me), and the girl, as she sang sweetly, splashed
the sparkling water with her tiny feet:--

  Lay us gently by the stream
    That wanders through our grassy meads;
  And thou, O sun! with kindly beam,
    Light up the bower that o'er us spreads.

  Here softly on the grass we'll sit,
    Where flowerets bloom and breezes sigh;
  Our feet laved in the gentle tide
    That, slowly gliding, murmurs by.

  Let roses bright and primrose fair
    With sweet perfume and lovely hues,
  Around us woo the ambient air,
    And breathe upon the falling dews.


Intent upon themselves and their simple occupation, and singing thus
in the fulness of their young hearts to the objects of Nature, the
boy and girl saw not those who were coming up the glen, creeping on
their hands and feet, with keen eyes and open ears.

  Place by my hand (with harp and shell),
    So long our solace and our pride,
  The shield that often roll'd the swell
    Of battle from our father's side!

  Let Ossian blind and tuneful Dall
    Strike from their harps a solemn sound,
  And open wide their airy hall--
    No bard will here, at eve, be found!


So closed the song, and at that moment a cry burst from Oina, while
Colin sprang up with a hand on his knife, for suddenly there arose
out of the long tossing leaves of the braken, or fern, the dark whins
and matted gorse, amid which the cattle grazed, about twenty
well-armed and fierce-looking Highlanders, whose tattered attire,
green tartans, and wild bearing, all proclaimed them to be strangers
and foes, who had come intent on spoil and hostility.




CHAPTER II.

THE CATERANS.

With her eyes dilated by terror, and her usually ruddy cheeks
blanched and pale, the girl clung to her companion, who stood
resolutely between her and those who had come so suddenly upon them.
Barking furiously, the otter terrier erected his shaggy back and also
shrunk close to the side of Colin.

These unwelcome visitors were all armed with basket-hilted swords,
dirks, and pistols.  He who seemed the leader bore a long _luagh_, or
Lochaber axe, the head of which is adapted for the triple purpose of
cutting, thrusting, or hooking an enemy.  They all wore waistcoats
and hose of untanned deerskin, rough, shaggy, and tied with thongs.

Their kilts and plaids were of tattered green tartan, and all wore
woollen shirts of dark red dyes.  Only a few had bonnets; but in
these they wore a tuft of deer-grass, the badge of the MacKenzies.
This, however, did not deceive the boy or girl, who knew them to be
MacRaes, who followed the banner of Lord Seaforth.

The leader, a giant in stature, but fleet of foot and active as a
roebuck, was a dark-visaged and savage-looking man, with eyebrows
that met over his nose, and were shaggy as the moustache that curled
round his fierce mouth, to mingle with his beard.  His belted plaid
was fastened by an antique silver brooch covered with twisted snakes,
and silver tassels adorned his sporan, which was of otter-skin
covered with white spots; and hence such skins are said in Scotland
to belong to the king of the otters.

"Keep your cur quiet, boy," said this formidable-looking fellow, "or
I must put a bullet into him.  Go on with your song, my girl, and
don't be alarmed; we shall not harm you."

"He is Duncan nan Creagh!" said Colin.

"And our cattle will be taken," sobbed Oina.

Indeed, while the boy and girl spoke their fears in whispers, the
gillies, or followers of Duncan of the Forays, as he was named, ran
round the cattle in a circle, driving them together, by holloing and
striking them with cudgels or the flat sides of their
claymores--occasionally using the point, to spur on the more lazy or
refractory.  Undaunted by the number of the caterans, Colin began to
shout shrilly and wildly for succour; but aid was far off, and the
echoes of the rocks alone replied.

"Silence!" exclaimed Duncan MacRae, fiercely, "or I shall fling you
into the pool, with a big stone at your neck!"

The boy bravely brandished his skene, and dipping his bonnet in the
rivulet, as a defence for his left hand, said,--

"Beware, you false cateran; these cattle are from the lands of
Finlarig; and Finlarig belongs to Breadalbane."

The tall cateran grinned, and replied,--

"Ay; but the beasties belong to the MacGregors----"

"From whom all men may take their prey," added another.

"True, MacAulay, and were they Breadalbane's own, every hoof and horn
should be mine, even though he were here, with all the Clan Diarmed
of the Boar at his back.  Hear you that, my little man?  But the
Griogarich--wheeugh!"

And the tall cateran snapped his fingers with contempt and grinned
savagely, as he made a whistling sound.

This action, and the slighting manner in which his clan was spoken
of, made Colin tremble with rage.  His ruddy cheek grew pale with
emotion, and his eyes flashed with light.

In pursuing a sturdy little bullock, one of the MacRaes dropped a
pistol.  Quick as lightning young Colin sprang forward, possessed
himself of it, and fired full at the head of Duncan nan Creagh!  The
latter reeled, for the ball had pierced his bonnet, and grazed the
scalp of his head, causing the blood to trickle over his sombre
visage.  Then, before he could recover himself, the fearless boy
hurled the empty pistol, which was one of the heavy steel _tacks_
still worn with the Highland dress, at the cateran's head, which it
narrowly missed.

Oina and he now turned to seek safety in flight; but the MacRae
caught him by the hook of his long poleaxe, and fearing further
violence, the brave Colin clung to his right arm with fierce energy.
Duncan tried to shake him off; but in vain.  At last, he fiercely
_bit_ the hand of the poor boy, who relinquished his hold with a
scream of pain.

At that moment the savage fellow exclaimed,--

"Wasp of a MacGregor, _that_ will take the sting out of you," and cut
down Colin, by a single stroke of his ponderous axe, severing his
right (some say his left) arm from his body.

Without a moan, 